I've been asked to give my opinion on an
ambitious new vegan movement called
direct action everywhere and I don't
want to sound like a jerk and I don't
want to sound overly negative or overly
harsh or critical however I live in a
city where direct action everywhere
doesn't exist they don't have a chapter
here and what I know about them is
simply based on the way they define
themselves on their own website and some
lectures and public statements made by
one of their founders and leaders a guy
named Wayne young now it is to Wayne's
credit that he sets the bar high for
himself he openly states his
intellectual aspirations as well as his
political ambitions he states his own
sort of pedigree in terms of the books
that have influenced him the professors
that have influenced him and so on and
as such he invites a fairly high level
of scrutiny for his ideas and for the
plan that he sets down and sets out as
being directly informed by the
conclusions of social science research
so that being said it may come as a
surprise to Wayne that some people such
as myself who could be his strongest
supporters actually have a lot of
apprehension and skepticism when looking
at the material he's creating that he
may imagine would appeal very strongly
to someone like myself my first diploma
is in political science I have a serious
political interest in veganism and
social movements and social change of
various kinds anyone who sincerely cares
about the very recent history of what's
called the Arab Spring basically
argument from 2010 to 2015 most of the
big events people remember 2011 anyone
who sincerely cares about that history
would be somewhat nauseated by the
cynical use that Wayne makes of the
history of the Arab Spring in presenting
his case for his preferred method for
vegan activism the history of the Arab
Spring at this point has a tremendously
high body count and anyone who hears
what Wayne has to say about it I mean
whether or not you care much about
politics would have to wonder look Wayne
have you read even one book about the
politics of Egypt or of any other
country that's been involved Spring Arab
Spring covers a lot of territory and a
lot of complex political histories but
it's grim and of course in the last few
years
most of the optimism has disappeared
from evaluations of what happened why it
happened and what the outcomes were now
that doesn't mean I'm offended in a
childlike way by the idea of a vegan
talking about the Arab Spring if you
have a sincere interest in it and your
opinion is informed by the facts with or
without any sensitivity to those facts
you know by all means say whatever you
got to say but when I'm hearing and
responding to the the manifesto like
declarations that Wayne song is making
on the basis of his very strange
interpretation the Arab Spring I'm
certainly disappointed I don't think
Wayne lives up to his own hype now the
other examples that he chooses to
cherry-pick from the political history
of the world
and kind of dumb down and misrepresent
and used to further his aims are slavery
the civil rights struggle of the 1960's
and gay rights gay marriage he ports for
gay people and so on
um and none of those are used in an
intelligent or nuanced or well-informed
way I don't really feel like harping on
at length about that and most people
would probably respond very negatively
if I were to launch into a kind of heavy
detailed critique of how Wayne song
represents or misrepresents the history
of the abolition of slavery in the
United States however he doesn't mention
it casually or flippantly or in passing
he very seriously in with allusions to
published work and with the weight of
his own academic background as a four
professor of law he really presents in
all seriousness his interpretation of
the abolition of slavery as setting down
the framework for his approach to
veganism now there's so much wrong about
what he has say about slavery again I'm
not offended in principle that somebody
would want to pose a comparison in some
specific sense somebody might be able to
pose an intelligent and interesting set
of comparisons between the history of
the abolition of slavery and what's
going on in veganism right now but
Wayne's young fails to do that instead
you have the sense of a self-righteous
and ignorant and cynical you know
misrepresented misrepresentation of a
few select facts here and there that
among other things completely omit to
mention the American Civil War
completely omit to mention the
significance of violence and and
leadership and executive action and so
on I mean you know in terms of the
misrepresentation he's making of the the
abolition movement the American
Revolution in specifically I mean to me
what that's already a question like the
way slavery was abolished in Haiti is
very different for his States
America in Haiti
there was a real grassroots slave
rebellion a rebellion from the bottom up
a real revolution that was how slavery
was abolished in Haiti in the United
States it was a much more peculiar and
contradictory balancing act
you know the Union forces that fight
that fought the war to abolish slavery
more than 90% of them were white and you
know this guy named Abraham Lincoln
ended up making a coalition of all these
abolitionist parties many of whom had
sworn they were passivist and would
never support violence but then when
Lincoln started putting together his
plans soon enough they did indeed
support the Civil War and so on it's a
very strange political history again
anyone who's sincerely interested in it
and was making some kind of intelligent
or well-informed commentary on what this
has to do with a bunch of vegans on a
website trying to start a kind of
in formal community and to organized
street protests against foie gras or
against government subsidies for the
dairy industry and meat agriculture it's
it's tenuous at best it's it's a real
stretch but sorry coming back to what
what you Swain is making of these
historical anecdotes that both have
nothing to do with one another and a
nothing new with veganism the UC makes
of slavery the civil rights movement of
the 1960s gay rights movement and the
Arab Spring he's using them to support
his peculiar view of what used to be
called leaderless resistance or a
cephalus resistance but that he's here
instead presenting as a social network
model of protest activism and social
change and I mean the parts just do not
fit that model he's presenting which
already I have problems with I mean if
we're having a serious intellectual
discussion about activism and social
change already to me that's he's setting
forth a very problematic and debatable
set of ideas and he's setting them forth
as if they were the unassailable
conclusions of the social sciences as if
the social sciences have conclusions
that work like an objective checklist of
here's what to do next or vegan activism
you know whereas in reality the social
science has presented us with the most
murky uncertain and debatable of
provisional suggestions based on events
that are open to interpretation
I dare not digress to say more on that
you know this social network theory that
he presents with the very casual example
of how people on the Internet
select pop music to listen to you know
how they choose to listen to one song
rather than another song and without
even paying money for it how possibly do
you connect that argument to the
decision made by hundreds of thousands
of people to fight to the death
in the civil war to bring about the
abolition of slavery now I'm well aware
the abolition saver was not the only
issue in that war it was not the only
reason why people join the army however
it was one decisive issue and I'm still
I'm here speaking with brevity what what
do those two ideas have do with each
other in any way let alone any of these
ideas like his his very facile use of
what happened during the Arab Spring and
this model he's putting forth that on
the one hand is an idea of community
reduced to people giving each other the
thumbs up on Facebook which is not a
community and the other hand this sort
of contrived outrage of a particular
type of street theater a particular type
of protest that you know I'm not opposed
to I don't have any agenda against this
style of protest but it doesn't seem to
answer any of his stated methodological
concerns Korea's he stated that he was
disappointed with the outcomes of the
types of political protest and activism
he had previously been involved with at
the University of Chicago I think that
for him and for direct action everywhere
as an organization started a series of
questions being asked and those were
good questions to do what we call
outcome evaluation in the social
sciences to say okay what really gets
results and what doesn't however it
seems to me the direct action everywhere
started with all the right questions and
they haven't yet come to the right
answers and that's fine I mean the
future of the of the organization may be
bright however the purpose of this video
is to say when I as an outsider look at
the case being presented by Wayne Siong
I am turned off I'm given a negative
impression of this organization and what
they're about and I'm sure that's the
furthest thing from their minds I'm sure
they don't see anything wrong with what
they're saying about slavery the civil
rights movement etc and they are very
proud of what they have to say about the
politics of outrage but what I see is a
tremendously fast silent election is
honest approach to the issues
and it doesn't show any since you're
interested in or concern for the real
history that has a real body count for
the issues being invoked again to repeat
myself the Arab Spring us of rights
movement and slavery and it's not out of
sensitivity it's not because people are
easily offended that I would ask them to
either research those matters more
deeply or say nothing of this sort it's
not it's not it of a tendency to censor
it's just out of my sense that you know
people at Wayans Young who seems
tremendously confident the message he's
delivering in my eyes he's he's making a
fool of himself
now to come back to this sort of twinned
issue on the one hand the methodology of
direct action everywhere is supposed to
be a community and I've really got to
put a footnote to ask what did they mean
by community because it's not what I
mean by the word community and then the
other hand they have this whole praxis
of the politics of outrage and that is
ostensibly based on Wayne song's
analysis although I think his analysis
is worse than what you can here on CNN
of how it was outrage that sparked the
Arab Spring and it was moral outrage
that brought about the abolition of
slavery in the United States of America
yes you know a civil war had nothing to
do with it moral transformation well you
know again as political arguments go
it's certainly common debt to pick and
choose but yeah in this case it's a bit
it's a bit chilling to see the extent of
the misrepresentation of these facts to
suit his theory and then beyond that he
has this whole methodology of trying to
focus on beliefs rather than behaviors
of saying that presenting people with
facts does not bring about changes and
outcome that veganism can't be a facts
based movement it has to be a an
ideological movement a belief space
movement all right so I have a lot of
problems with this
and I'm sure people in direct action
everywhere wouldn't expect other vegans
thing that's problematic but I do not
regard vegans as people who are united
by their beliefs I regard vegans as
people who are actually divided by their
beliefs as people have tremendously
diverse political beliefs religious
beliefs and so on and direct action
everywhere is not promising something to
me that would strengthen the movement
but instead promising to weaken the
movement or separate it into smaller
parcels with this emphasis on belief and
ideology and now many parts that
ideology are left unstated Wayne
repeatedly alludes to and invokes a very
nebulous notion of progressive politics
well Wayne your idea of progressive
politics may not be the same as someone
who grew up Hindu and within Hinduism
was familiar with the concept that
animals lives are worth something was
taught that cows were sacred and then at
one point figured out that the dairy
industry was both unethical in that
exploited cows and caused suffering to
them and bad for the environment and who
made the move from mainstream Hinduism
to veganism let's say on ecologically
and ethically motivated veganism that
could be the basis for a real community
and for a real political impetus long
term and veganism I do not think in
general that public which is already
significant in countries like the United
States and Canada it's going to be even
bigger in India but Hindus who shift to
veganism they are not going to be a
stereotypical progressive left-wing
liberal white Americans they're going to
have a very different set of beliefs
from you I'm including very often on
issues like gender roles gender politics
marriage what kind of hairstyle you
should have and so on I could insert
here of course a long set of remarks
about Buddhism and the status of
veganism in Buddhism within the next 20
years I think there's going to be more
action in Hindus becoming the
then there will be within Buddhism
that's my bet
I think both of those Hinduism and
Buddhism are going to create much more
durable communities or bases for
communities than teenagers on the
internet who post pictures themselves
wearing balaclavas and posing as armed
radicals if if you're a gambling man you
can place your bet - sorry coming back -
what I felt with the broadest issues
raised here on the one hand Wayne's
young and Troy - and everywhere talk
about community which is problematic and
on the other hand they're talking about
the politics of outrage and they don't
really spell this out I mean Wayne just
puts up the image of Martin Luther King
jr. and invokes the history of the
American civil rights movement and
really what he's doing is calling up the
shallowest understanding possible of
what the role of outrage was the
politics of outrage in the history of
the u.s. civil rights movement he's
summoning up an idea of what brought
about legal changes and social changes
based on you know still images on the
nightly news the image of policemen
beating protesters the images of outrage
of people on the streets being sprayed
with hoses attacked by guard dogs this
sort of thing um you know those moments
of outrage they're often featured in
high school textbooks on history they're
featured on the nightly news but this
really does not give you any kind of
insight into the substance and the body
and the basis of the u.s. civil rights
movement why it worked and how it worked
and how they managed to combine people
who had very very different political
beliefs into one movement that is
something that vegans should maybe look
at and try to learn from um but you know
anyone who's read even one book but
civil rights the United States would
immediately recognize that black
American churches were a huge part of
what made it possible for someone like
dr. Martin Luther King jr. to take a
lecture to
from coast to coast and moved from
church to church
another type of institution is
tremendously important were the the
black colleges what we now call
historically black universities again
these provided real communities real
units of social organization social
capital if you like that term that
existed before the civil rights movement
away and then really provided the stage
for the civil rights movement to unfold
on and you know those units of social
capital were not produced by outrage and
also I just want to add as I was saying
earlier they encompassed a tremendous
diversity of political beliefs and
religious beliefs obviously if you're
talking about South Carolina a lot of
those black churches that got involved
the civil rights movement were extremely
conservative and by today's standards
might be considered right-wing on the
other hand on some of the black campuses
and in some of the big cities there were
socialist organizations and communist
organizations involved with the civil
rights movement that were extremely
left-wing and all kinds of other
combinations in between and you know
part of the civil rights movement was
the challenge of getting those people to
work together on a particular program so
in the history of the civil rights
movement it's very misleading to just
look at this moment of outrage which is
in some ways the end of the process that
went on for decades if not a whole
century of many small largely unseen
political struggles that built up those
communities that built up the levels of
trust and cooperation within a church
between a church and its leader within
different social movements little
struggles that may have included you
know having a picnic and a raffle to
raise money to help someone who was in
the hospital and couldn't pay his
hospital bills going and visiting
someone in prison the community
organizing to try to get the person a
fair trial you know thousands of tiny
struggles over decades and building up
social code
and trust in these types of institutions
that were indeed scattered around the
whole of the United States and that the
civil rights movement was to some extent
able to organize and galvanize partly by
doing relatively fun activities you know
a huge part of the civil rights movement
at that time was actually having groups
of musicians go from town to town town
church and lecturers including Martin
Luther King jr. often traveled with
those musicians and then you know you
know this excited people and got them
even more active involved in movement
okay now my first point was this whole
history has nothing in common with the
argument for veganism the Wayne Stephens
is offering any parallel to to veganism
I think is very hard to construe and
there is a certain kind of lack of
sensitivity and lack of sincere interest
in the facts of history in this approach
with that haven't been said as soon as
we really pose the contrast sincerely I
think what's important for us to
recognize is precisely that the type of
social capital the type of community
building I've just described is exactly
what the whole vegan movement is lacking
definitely the United States and Canada
we don't have church groups across South
Carolina we don't have vegan colleges in
Georgia we don't have that we have
anything like that anywhere in the world
but definitely not in the United States
and Canada and again if you were gonna
look pragmatically and honestly it who
might have that who might have the basis
for forming a community and those types
of institutions and that type of trust
it will probably be Hindu groups maybe
in a few cases Buddhist groups that are
now making a shift from one type of
vegetarianism maybe more heavily based
on supernatural concerns to another type
of veganism maybe more informed by
ecology ethics and so on so I'm not just
saying this to kind of heap scorn on the
frankly idiotic use of the history of
slavery and civil rights that Wayans
Young has made and that in my eyes gives
direct attention everywhere a bad name
I'm also doing it to draw attention to
this peculiar contrast I see between all
of the rhetoric about outrage about the
politics of outrage about how moral
outrage is supposedly going to transform
the vegan movement transform the world
and the promises that direct action ever
was making about providing a community I
think that's easy to boast of it's easy
to promise and very hard to deliver on I
think if you you really thought about it
with all due humility think about how
much of a struggle it would be for any
vegan organization to even do what a
small Protestant church and the American
South does for a community in terms of
community services and in terms of
building cooperation and trust and so on
in the community good luck I mean search
all over the internet good luck finding
any example of a secular vegan
organization doing that and you know
practically if you're looking for a
community if you want a community to do
for you the things that a community
really does that can include helping you
with day care for your children through
helping you with funeral for your
grandparents you can today find that
pretty easily through religious
organizations through some cult-like
organizations in the past probably some
left-wing groups would provide you with
a community not lately so much I don't
think vegans are doing it anywhere in
the world and when I look at the
promises of community being made by
direct action everywhere
I'm skeptical I wonder can they deliver
on that promise and are they taking that
seriously or is this just another
website that says it's gonna conquer the
world but doesn't provide you with much
more than the links to a couple people's
Facebook pages and encouragement to go
stand by the side of the road and hold
up a sign saying Meat Is Murder
I want to end this by saying if I did
live in a city where direct action
everywhere exists I would happily go to
a meeting and meet whoever was involved
and just decide on a case-by-case basis
are these people I can work with are
these people who are trying to make
something positive happen can I
cooperate with them to try to do
something positive and I don't assume
that the actual formal definition of
direct action everywhere presented by
Wayans young
I don't assume that it's like a
constitution that everyone in direct
action everywhere knows I don't assume
that everyone particularly agrees with
it or follows Wayne as their great
leader
I assume that like most websites anyone
can sign up and you probably meet good
people bad people and all kinds of
people who happen to get involve eeeh
that website and via that organization
so the point of this video is not to
rain on their parade but maybe if some
people at DXE see this and think about
it they'll start to think about how the
rhetoric they're indulging in may be
alienating some of the people who could
be their most highly motivated
supporters when you talk about the Arab
Spring think for a minute about how this
would sound to somebody who's a refugee
from the Arab Spring living here in
Canada now think about how it would
sound just to somebody who really has
some sincere interest in the ongoing
politics of that situation which again
is politics to the body count when
you're making these types of very
amateurish statements about the history
of slavery how do you think that sounds
to someone who really cares about that
history